---
Tags:
    - Agent Development
    - Editor
---

# Vim Soar Plug-In

This package allows you to edit your Soar files in vim more easily by providing
the following capabilities:

*   Syntax highlighting
*   Auto-indenting
*   Moving around by productions
*   Toggling comment/uncomment productions
*   Code folding (You can fold a production into a single line)
*   Taglist support

## Download Links

*   [Vim_Soar_Formatting_Plugin.zip](https://github.com/SoarGroup/website-downloads/raw/main/AgentDevelopmentTools/Vim_Soar_Formatting_Plugin.zip)

## Usage Instructions

Download the archive and expand it into `$HOME/.vim` (`C:\Documents and Settings\user\vimfiles`
in Windows). You should have the following files:

| File              | Description |
|-------------------|-------------|
| ftplugin/soar.vim | main configuration file |
| ftdetect/soar.vim | makes vim recognize .soar files as filetype "soar" |
| indent/soar.vim   | auto-indentation configuration |
| syntax/soar.vim   | syntax highlighting configuration |

Next, add the following lines to your `.vimrc` ( `_vimrc` on Windows):

```vim
 filetype on            " enable filetype detection
 filetype plugin on     " run ftplugin/soar.vim for .soar files
 filetype indent on     " enable custom indentation
 syntax on              " enable syntax highlighting
```

Note that if you're using terminal vim in *nix, you may also need to enable colors
with

```vim
set t_Co=256
```

Now any file you open with the `.soar` extension should be highlighted and auto-indented.
You should also be able to fold and unfold single productions using the standard
`zc` and `zo` commands (see `:help folding`). Furthermore, there are some
convenient keyboard shortcuts defined:

In normal mode:

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| <kbd>Alt</kbd>-<kbd>k</kbd> | Move to the previous production |
| <kbd>Alt</kbd>-<kbd>j</kbd> | Move to the next production |
| <kbd>Alt</kbd>-<kbd>c</kbd> | Toggle commenting out the production |
| <kbd>Alt</kbd>-<kbd>a</kbd> | Create an application rule for the proposal rule the cursor is in |

In insert mode, right after you finish typing a condition or action that ends with
a variable, you can "chain" the variable into the next condition by pressing
<kbd>Alt</kbd>-<kbd>e</kbd>. For example, if your cursor is at the location of
the `X` here:

```soar
sp {test
    (state <s> ^superstate <ss>)X
```

and you press <kbd>Alt</kbd>-<kbd>e</kbd> while in insert mode, the text will become:

```soar
sp {test
    (state <s> ^superstate <ss>)
    (<ss> ^X
```

and your cursor will have moved to the location of the `X`, ready for typing the
attribute test.

### Tag Lists

The taglist plugin for vim allows you to open a window that lists all the tags
generated by the ctags program for files you're editing. With very little work it
can be made to list productions in agent files. You can then jump to any production,
even across different files, by navigating this list. This is quite useful when your
productions are distributed across many files, for example if you created them with
Visual Soar.

1.  Install Exuberant ctags from <http://ctags.sourceforge.net> or your Linux package
manager.
2.  Install the taglist plugin from here.
3.  To get ctags to recognize Soar source code, add these lines into your
`$HOME/.ctags` file (or `C:\Documents and Settings\user\ctags.cnf` in Windows):

```soar
--langdef=soar
 --langmap=soar:.soar
 --regex-soar=/^[ \t]*[gs]p[ \t]*\{[ \t]*([-a-zA-Z0-9_\*\|]*)/\1/p,production/
```

*Note:* Depending on your version of ctags, you may have to replace the escaped brace
`\{` with a regular brace. ctags should complain loudly about an unmatched brace
if the syntax is wrong.

Now when you're editing a `.soar` file, you should be able to run the command
`:TlistOpen` and get a list of all the productions in the current file. You can
also use `:TlistAddFiles *.soar` to add all files in the directory.

## Developer

Joseph Xu
